# Lovefield 145: Data heavy web apps design

## Understand your limitations

Keep in mind the following limitations from the web standards and set up
realistic goals for your code.

1. There is no relational query engine support in browser. Either use
   Lovefield, or try to use sql.js (SQLite in WASM). As the author of
   Lovefield, I try to promote its usage without bad mouthing others.
   So I'll just tell you Lovefield is very good and should be your choice.

2. You have only one thread because of JavaScript. I/O will affect your UI.
   You can try to use workers or other stuff to dodge, however, by the end
   of the day you're on the mercy of browser and that does not always exist.

3. You do not have any type checking. Javascript does not do that. Your best
   hope is to use TypeScript and discipline your own code.

4. Synchronizing browser end data with server will be really, really hard.
   Existing available solutions are more of "message type", mean that they
   are okay to do kilobytes, but not that feasible for mega- or giga-byte
   scale.

5. You do not have much support from Internet. Most in JavaScript/Web
   community does not have expertise to tell what and why certain database
   or index structure will be better in a given condition. Most in backend
   community does not know the limitation of browser/Web. My suggestion is
   to do your due diligence in computer science and develop a proper
   strategy based on your own situation.

6. Web evolves really fast but the W3C standards are at best snail pace
   if it's ever moving. Think that it's just like US Congress or whatever
   law authoring agency in Democratic countries. By design they will be
   slow. So chances are you will not have the dream APIs there in the next
   five to ten years.

7. In-field debugging will have many privacy concerns. Be very careful.

If you read to here and still decide to do a client-side solution instead
of server-side, carry on.


## Relational or not relational, that is a question

The first question you need to ask yourself is, do you need a relational
database?

If you don't know the answer, most likely you do if you need to do queries.
Queries means that you need to filter data from your database and then
work on the data.

If you wish to dig deeper, again, don't trust what I said, trust computer
science. Lecture contents in database classes should answer this question
in a much more detailed and scientific fashion.


## Understanding the limitation of Lovefield

Lovefield is the only commercial-grade relational query engine written in
JavaScript. Here the "commercial-grade" means more about its stability
and field experiences. Lovefield has quite a few limitations that are
very different from traditional relational databases:

1. The memory/storage Lovefield can use is constrained by the browser.
   Most browser today cannot use more than 2GB of memory for any JavaScript
   program, means that you cannot operate a database greater than 2GB.
   (Lovefield does not implement paging because JavaScript does not support
   memory management).

2. Lovefield loads everything from persistent storage (IndexedDB) to memory
   during its initialization. The load time is in direct proportion of the
   database size. Developers are advised to use perceptual optimization
   (e.g. loading animations) for user experiences.

3. Lovefield has only two index types: row id (hash) and B+ Tree (everything
   else). In some scenarios, the B+ Tree is not the most efficient data
   structure (e.g. full text search, multi-key range search). You're welcome
   to contribute different index type to Lovefield.

4. The JavaScript performance is constrained by browser's JavaScript engine.
   This means that even if you attempted to optimize query, the final say
   will still be on browser and there's not much Lovefield can do with it.
   Since Lovefield's inception, I've hit by browser/V8 issues several times
   already.


## I want to use Lovefield, but

> Will you guys still be in business?

Yes. It's the best existing solution AFAIK.

> Will you support the library?

Yes, limited. I don't have time to write new features.

> Will you answer my questions?

Maybe. I am not paid for answering questions, so this will be no different
from most open source projects. I answer questions and maintain this code
base because of good will.

> Is this TypeScript port sponsored by Google?

No. Teams inside Google are welcome to adopt this project.
Teams outside Google are welcome to contribute to this project.

> Should I use this TypeScript port instead of JavaScript version of
Lovefield?

Depends. It's harder and harder for me to maintain the old JavaScript
version of Lovefield (Closure compiler is a huge pain, migrating to the
new open source management tool within Google is another). I personally
prefer the TypeScript version a lot. On the other hand, I did not use this
TypeScript port inside Google, so I cannot claim that it's battle hardened
until someone gives it a shot in billion-scale deployment. In short, you'll
need to have some faith with my code quality.
